Introduction
============

The Social Construction of Reality is a 1966 book about the sociology of
knowledge by the sociologists Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann.

Berger and Luckmann introduced the term "social construction" into the social
sciences and were strongly influenced by the work of Alfred Schütz. Their
central concept is that people and groups interacting in a social system create,
over time, concepts or mental representations of each other's actions, and that
these concepts eventually become habituated into reciprocal roles played by the
actors in relation to each other. When these roles are made available to other
members of society to enter into and play out, the reciprocal interactions are
said to be institutionalized. In the process, meaning is embedded in society.
Knowledge and people's conceptions (and beliefs) of what reality is become
embedded in the institutional fabric of society. Reality is therefore said to be
socially constructed.

In 1998 the International Sociological Association listed The Social
Construction of Reality as the fifth-most important sociological book of the
20th century

Basic concepts
==============

Social stock of knowledge
-------------------------

Earlier theories (Max Scheler, Karl Mannheim, Werner Stark, Karl Marx, Max
Weber, etc.) often focused too much on scientific and theoretical knowledge, but
this is only a small part of social knowledge, concerning a very limited group.
Customs, common interpretations, institutions, shared routines,
habitualizations, the who-is-who and who-does-what in social processes and the
division of labor, constitute a much larger part of knowledge in society.

“…theoretical knowledge is only a small and by no means the most important part
of what passed for knowledge in a society… the primary knowledge about the
institutional order is knowledge… is the sum total of ‘what everybody knows’
about a social world, an assemblage of maxims, morals, proverbial nuggets of
wisdom, values and beliefs, myths, and so forth” (p.65)

Semantic fields
---------------

The general body of knowledge is socially distributed, and classified in
semantic fields. The dynamic distribution and inter dependencies of these
knowledge sectors provide structure to the social stock of knowledge:

“The social stock of knowledge differentiates reality by degrees of familiarity…
my knowledge of my own occupation and its world is very rich and specific, while
I have only very sketchy knowledge of the occupational worlds of others” (p.43)
“The social distribution of knowledge thus begins with the simple fact that I do
not know everything known to my fellowmen, and vice versa, and culminates in
exceedingly complex and esoteric systems of expertise. Knowledge of how the
socially available stock of knowledge is distributed, at least in outline, is an
important element of that same stock of knowledge.” (p.46)

Language and signs
------------------

Language also plays an important role in the analysis of integration of everyday
reality. Language links up commonsense knowledge with finite provinces of
meaning, thus enabling people, for example, to interpret dreams through
understandings relevant in the daytime. "Language is capable of transcending the
reality of everyday life altogether. It can refer to experiences pertaining to
finite provinces of meaning, it can span discrete spheres of reality...Language
soars into regions that are not only de facto but also a priori unavailable to
everyday experience."p. 40. Regarding the function of language and signs, Berger
and Luckmann are indebted to George Herbert Mead and other figures in the field
known as symbolic interactionism, as acknowledged in their Introduction,
especially regarding the possibility of constructing objectivity.

Signs and language provide interoperability for the construction of everyday
reality:

“A sign [has the] explicit intention to serve as an index of subjective meanings
… Language is capable of becoming the objective repository of vast accumulations
of meaning and experience, which it can then preserve in time and transmit to
following generations… Language also typifies experiences, allowing me to
subsume them under broad categories in terms of which they have meaning not only
to myself but also to my fellowmen” (p.35-39)

Social everyday reality
-----------------------

Social everyday reality is characterized by Intersubjectivity (which refers to
the coexistence of multiple realities in this context)(p. 23-25):

“Compared to the reality of everyday life, other realities appear as finite
provinces of meaning, enclaves within the paramount reality marked by
circumscribed meanings and modes of experience” (p.25)

This is in contrast to other realities, such as dreams, theoretical constructs,
religious or mystic beliefs, artistic and imaginary worlds, etc. While
individuals may visit other realities (such as watching a film), they are always
brought back to everyday reality (once the film ends)(p. 25).

Society as objective reality
============================

“ Social order is a human product, or more precisely, an ongoing human
production ” Institutionalization[edit] Institutionalization of social processes
grows out of the habitualization and customs, gained through mutual observation
with subsequent mutual agreement on the “way of doing things”. This reduces
uncertainty and danger and allows our limited attention span to focus on more
things at the same time, while institutionalized routines can be expected to
continue “as previously agreed”:

“Habitualization carries with it the important psychological gain that choices
are narrowed… the background of habitualized activity opens up a foreground for
deliberation and innovation [which demand a higher level of attention]… The most
important gain is that each [member of society] will be able to predict the
other’s actions. Concomitantly, the interaction of both becomes predictable…
Many actions are possible on a low level of attention. Each action of one is no
longer a source of astonishment and potential danger to the other“ (p.53-57).

Social objective worlds
-----------------------

Social (or institutional) objective worlds are one consequence of
institutionalization, and are created when institutions are passed on to a new
generation. This creates a reality that is vulnerable to the ideas of a minority
which will then form the basis of social expectations in the future. The
underlying reasoning is fully transparent to the creators of an institution, as
they can reconstruct the circumstances under which they made agreements; while
the second generation inherits it as something “given”, “unalterable” and
“self-evident” and they might not understand the underlying logic.

“…a social world [is] a comprehensive and given reality confronting the
individual in a manner analogous to the reality of the natural world… In early
phases of socialization the child is quite incapable of distinguishing between
the objectivity of natural phenomena and the objectivity of the social
formations… The objective reality of institutions is not diminished if the
individual does not understand their purpose or their mode of operation… He must
‘go out’ and learn about them, just as he must learn about nature… (p.59-61)

Division of labor
-----------------

Division of labor is another consequence of institutionalization. Institutions
assign “roles” to be performed by various actors, through typification of
performances, such as “father-role”, “teacher-role”, “hunter”, “cook”, etc. As
specialization increases in number as well as in size and sophistication, a
civilization's culture contains more and more sections of knowledge specific to
given roles or tasks, sections which become more and more esoteric to
non-specialists. These areas of knowledge do not belong anymore to the common
social world and culture.

“A society’s stock of knowledge is structured in terms of what is generally
relevant and what is relevant only to specific roles… the social distribution of
knowledge entails a dichotomization in terms of general and role-specific
relevance… because of the division of labor, role-specific knowledge will grow
at a faster rate than generally relevant and accessible knowledge… The
increasing number and complexity of [the resulting] sub universes [of
specialized knowledge] make them increasingly inaccessible to outsiders
(p.77-87)

Symbolic universes
------------------

Symbolic universes are created to provide legitimation to the created
institutional structure. Symbolic universes are a set of beliefs “everybody
knows” that aim at making the institutionalized structure plausible and
acceptable for the individual—who might otherwise not understand or agree with
the underlying logic of the institution. As an ideological system, the symbolic
universe “puts everything in its right place”. It provides explanations for why
we do things the way we do. Proverbs, moral maxims, wise sayings, mythology,
religions and other theological thought, metaphysical traditions and other value
systems are part of the symbolic universe. They are all (more or less
sophisticated) ways to legitimize established institutions.

“The function of legitimation is to make objectively available and subjectively
plausible the ‘first-order’ objections that have been institutionalized…
Proverbs, moral maxims and wise sayings are common on this level… [as well as]
explicit theories… symbolic processes… a general theory of the cosmos and a
general theory of man… The symbolic universe also orders history. It locates all
collective events in a cohesive unity that includes past, present and future.”
(p. 92-104)

Universe-maintenance
--------------------

Universe-maintenance refers to specific procedures undertaken, often by an elite
group, when the symbolic universe does not fulfill its purpose anymore, which is
to legitimize the institutional structure in place. This happens, for example,
in generational shifts, or when deviants create an internal movement against
established institutions (e.g. against revolutions), or when a society is
confronted with another society with a greatly different history and
institutional structures. In primitive societies this happened through
mythological systems, later on through theological thought. Today, an extremely
complex set of science has secularized universe-maintenance.

“Specific procedures of universe-maintenance become necessary when the symbolic
universe has become a problem. As long as this is not the case, the symbolic
universe is self-maintaining, that is self-legitimating. An intrinsic problem
presents itself with the process of transmission of the symbolic universe from
one generation to another… [additionally] two societies confronting each other
with conflicting universes will both develop conceptual machinery designed to
maintain their respective universes… mythology represents the most archaic form
of universe-maintenance… theological thought may be distinguished from its
mythological predecessor simply in terms of its greater degree of theoretical
systematization… Modern science is an extreme step in this development.
(p.104-116)

Society as subjective reality
=============================

Socialization
-------------

Socialization is a two-step induction of the individual to participate in the
social institutional structure, meaning in its objective reality.

"The individual… is not born a member of society. He… becomes a member of
society. In the life of every individual… there is a temporal sequence, in the
course of which he is inducted into participation in the social dialectic"
(p. 129) “By ‘successful socialization’ we mean the establishment of a high
degree of symmetry between objective and subjective reality” (p. 163)

Primary Socialization takes place as a child. It is highly charged emotionally
and is not questioned. Secondary Socialization includes the acquisition of
role-specific knowledge, thus taking one’s place in the social division of
labor. It is learned through training and specific rituals, and is not
emotionally charged: “it is necessary to love one’s mother, but not one’s
teacher”. Training for secondary socialization can be very complex and depends
on the complexity of division of labor in a society. Primary socialization is
much less flexible than secondary socialization. E.g. shame for nudity comes
from primary socialization, adequate dress code depends on secondary: A
relatively minor shift in the subjective definition of reality would suffice for
an individual to take for granted that one may go to the office without a tie. A
much more drastic shift would be necessary to have him go, as a matter of
course, without any clothes at all.

“The child does not internalize the world of his significant others as one of
many possible worlds… It is for this reason that the world internalized in
primary socialization is so much more firmly entrenched in consciousness than
worlds internalized in secondary socialization…. Secondary socialization is the
internalization of institutional or institution-based ‘sub worlds’… The roles of
secondary socialization carry a high degree of anonymity… The same knowledge
taught by one teacher could also be taught by another… The institutional
distribution of tasks between primary and secondary socialization varies with
the complexity of the social distribution of knowledge” (p. 129-147)

Conversation
------------

Conversation or verbal communication aims at reality-maintenance of the
subjective reality. What seems to be a useless and unnecessary communication of
redundant banalities is actually a constant mutual reconfirmation of each
other's internal thoughts, in that it maintains subjective reality.

“One may view the individual’s everyday life in terms of the working away of a
conversational apparatus that ongoingly maintains, modifies and reconstructs his
subjective reality… [for example] ‘Well, it’s time for me to get to the
station,’ and ‘Fine, darling, have a good day at the office’ implies an entire
world within which these apparently simple propositions make sense… the exchange
confirms the subjective reality of this world… the great part, if not all, of
everyday conversation maintains subjective reality… imagine the effect…of an
exchange like this: ‘Well, it’s time for me to get to the station,’ ‘Fine,
darling, don’t forget to take along your gun.’ (p. 147-163)

Identity
--------

Identity of an individual is subject to a struggle of affiliation to sometimes
conflicting realities. For example, the reality from primary socialization
(mother tells child not to steal) can be in contrast with second socialization
(gang members teach teenager that stealing is cool). Our final social location
in the institutional structure of society will ultimately also influence our
body and organism.

“…life-expectancies of lower-class and upper-class [vary] …society determines
how long and in what manner the individual organism shall live… Society also
directly penetrates the organism in its functioning, most importantly in respect
to sexuality and nutrition. While both sexuality and nutrition are grounded in
biological drives… biological constitution does not tell him where he should
seek sexual release and what he should eat.” (p. 163-183)
